Information from / about the carbon footprint of Edinburgh, and the City of Edinburgh Council. 

From the 2023/2024 CEC Public Sector Report on Compliance with Climate Change Duties report:

The City Council declared a climate emergency in 2019 and a nature emergency in 2023 and has committed to achieving net zero emissions by 2030. The Council provides the leadership for the Net Zero Edinburgh Leadership Board and has a key leadership role in the Edinburgh Adaptation and Nature partnership and development of Edinburgh’s next climate change adaptation plan, Climate Ready Edinburgh.

Staff 16,318
Population 523,250

The City of Edinburgh Council declared a climate emergency in February 2019, set a new target for the city to be net zero by 2030 and declared a nature emergency in 2023. To achieve this net zero target and adapt the city to the impacts of climate change, a 2030 Climate Strategy and Implementation Plan was approved in November 2021. The Strategy contains Council and citywide governance and reporting structures and strategic actions to achieve the 2030 net zero target and adapt the city.

A Council Emissions Reduction Plan (CERP) (approved November 2021) outlines a phased action plan for reducing Council corporate emissions emissions. A CERP Board,  established in 2022,  provides strategic leadership and operational accountability for delivery of the Council’s organisational emissions target of net zero by 2030. It is chaired by the Service Director for Sustainable Development and includes Council’s key service areas for each of the strands of the plan (Buildings, Fleet, Waste, Human Resources and Procurement).

The Council's Policy and Sustainability Committee provides political oversight and scrutiny of progress towards the Council and city targets. A Sustainability and Climate Emergency All Party Oversight Group (APOG), comprising the Convener of the Policy and Sustainability Committee and an elected member from each of the other political groups, provides a mechanism for Elected Members to engage with the sustainability programme.

A Sustainability Programme Board co-ordinates actions across the Council, drives programme implementation, provides officer and elected member leadership and oversight for delivery of council actions that contribute to the implementation of the 2030 Climate Strategy. The Sustainability Programme Board is chaired by the Council’s Executive Director of Place as Senior Responsible Officer for Sustainability and includes Heads of Service for the Council’s key service areas, including planning, operational services, sustainable development including strategic asset planning, estates, construction and regeneration, housing and homelessness, procurement, finance, education and corporate function.

Edinburgh’s Net Zero Edinburgh Leadership Board (NZELB) was established from the 2030 Climate Strategy for the city. The board's role is to bring city partners together to provide city wide leadership in creating a green, clean and sustainable future for Edinburgh and develop a green infrastructure investment plan for the city. The Board members are the Council, the University of Edinburgh, the NHS, SP Energy Networks, Scottish Gas, Scottish Water and the Chamber of Commerce. The wider city partnerships on Transport infrastructure; City Heat and Energy Efficiency; Adaptation and Nature, and Just Transition have been established and are each led by one of the board member organisations.

The Council refreshed its Business Plan in 2023 with "Becoming a net zero city” remaining as one of its three core priorities, alongside ending poverty and creating good places to live and work.

